---
id: seminar-03
title: 3rd seminar
description: |
  Select sort implementation on arrays.
---

This assignment has two versions. For the light version you can get 0.5 K₡. For
the _full fat_ one 1 K₡. **You can choose only one of them**.

To both of them you are given some basic tests. You can also have a look at the
code used by the tests and use it to your advantage.

Details can be found in the doxygen comments included in the source files.

## Light version (`main_light.c`)

[Source](pathname:///files/pb071/bonuses/03/main_light.c)

For the light version you have 3 functions to finish:

1. `swap` - that swaps two ints passed by pointers.
2. `maximum` - that returns index of the biggest `int` in the array.
3. `select_sort` - that sorts passed array using Select Sort.

## Full fat version (`main.c`)

[Source](pathname:///files/pb071/bonuses/03/main.c)

For the full fat version you have 4 functions to implement:

1. `swap` - that swaps two variables passed by pointers.
2. `maximum` - that returns index of the biggest element in the array using the
   comparator.
3. `select_sort` - that sorts passed array using Select Sort.
4. `int_comparator` - that is used for generic sort and maximum

To 2nd and 3rd function you are given a pseudocode that you can use to implement
it.

## Submitting

Ideally submit the assignment through the merge request. Step-by-step tutorial is
present [here](../mr). For setting assignee my xlogin is `xfocko`.

In case you do not want to experiment on GitLab, send me the source code via email,
but please prefix subject with: `[PB071/14][seminar-03]`

Deadline for the submission of the bonus is **March 27th 24:00**.
